- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast
where we discuss science,
and science-based tools for everyday life.
[bright music]
- I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of
neurobiology and ophthalmology,
at Stanford School of Medicine.
This podcast is separate
from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of my desire
to bring you zero cost to
consumer information about science
and science-related tools
to the general public.
Along those lines,
I want to thank today's
sponsors of the podcast.
The first sponsor is Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is a product
that I've been using since 2012,
long before I launched this podcast.
So I'm delighted that they're
sponsoring the podcast.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin, mineral probiotic supplement.
It's a greens drink
that you mix with water,
I add lemon juice to mine
because I like the way it tastes
and it gets you all the
vitamins and minerals you need
as well as probiotics, and
probiotics are important to me
because there are a lot of data
now showing that gut health
is important for the gut brain access,
things like mood, immunity, etc.
If you want to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
and if you do that, they'll
send you a year supply
of liquid vitamin D3 and K2.
Vitamin D3, as many of
you probably already know,
it has been shown to be important
for various aspects of
immune system function,
as well as other biological pathways,
metabolic function, etc.
So once again, if you want
to try Athletic Greens,
you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
and they will send you a
year supply of the D3 K2.
This podcast is also
brought to us by Headspace.
Headspace is a meditation app
that makes meditation easy.
I've been meditating on and off
since I was in my teens
with more off than on,
mainly because meditation
can be hard to stick to.
Some people are very good
at maintaining a meditation practice,
others not so much, I'm
in the latter category.
However, I find that
when I have something
to guide my meditation
such as Headspace, it makes it much easier
for me to be consistent
about my meditation practice.
There is now tons of data out there
in quality peer review journals,
showing that meditative
states can facilitate
cognition, recovery of mental function,
recovery of physical ability, etc.
So there are a lot of reasons
to take up a meditation practice.
Headspace and the
Headspace app makes it easy
to learn and maintain
a meditation practice.
If you want to try Headspace,
you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer.
And if you do that, they
will let you try Headspace
for an entire month for free.
So zero risk there, that's
headspace.com/specialoffer
to try Headspace, the meditation app,
for one month for free.
Today's podcast episode is
about sleep and wakefulness.
We are going to discuss
jet lag, shift work,
babies, kids and the elderly,
and we are going to discuss protocols
that are backed by science.
That means quality peer reviewed papers
published in excellent journals
that can support particular tools
that you can use to combat
things like jet lag,
offset some of the negative
effects of shift work
and make life easier for the new parent
as well as for the newborn
child, the adolescent,
anyone that wants to sleep better,
feel better when they're awake, etc.
If you've listened to the previous
three episodes of the
Huberman Lab Podcast,
we've been exploring these themes
of wakefulness and sleepiness,
how to fall asleep, how to stay asleep.
And we've been discussing
parameters like light,
exercise, temperature, etc.
If you've had a chance to
listen to those episodes, great.
Today's discussion will be
even more digestible for you.
If you haven't, that's okay.
I will provide a little bit
of background here or there
so that it's not necessary
that you have listened to
those previous episodes.
But if you get a chance to listen to them,
please do it,
I think it will help you
digest the information better.
Let's just take a step back for a moment
and remind everybody
what we're talking about.
We're talking about an
endogenous, meaning within us,
rhythm that we call the circadian rhythm.
The circadian rhythm is a 24 hour rhythm
in all sorts of functions.
The most prominent one is a rhythm
in our feelings of
wakefulness and sleepiness.
So believe it or not,
the experiment has been
done throughout history,
not often, but it's been done
where people would go down into a cave
and will exist in constant
darkness for some period of time.
There are also cases
where people have been in constant light
for some period of time.
But because people can close their eyes,
it's actually easier to do the experiment
where you're in constant darkness
to address the question
of what is the endogenous,
meaning, the internal
rhythm that we all have.
And it turns out we all have
this rhythm of about 24 hours,
although it's not exactly 24 hours.
Meaning, every 24 hours
your body temperature
goes from low to high and
back down to low again.
And it takes 24 hours for that to repeat.
Not 18, not six, 24 plus
or minus a couple hours.
You also have a rhythm in
sleepiness and wakefulness
that correlates with that.
We tend to be sleepy as
our temperature is falling,
getting lower, and we tend
to be more awake or waking
when our temperature is increasing.
This is a biological fact.
It is right down to our DNA.
We actually have genes in
every single one of our cells
that ensure that every cell
is on this 24 hour-ish rhythm,
close to 24 hours.
We have a clock over
the roof of our mouth,
a group of neurons called
the suprachiasmatic nucleus.
That clock generates a 24 hour rhythm.
And that clock is in-trained,
meaning it is matched,
to the external light-dark cycle,
which is no surprise, 24 hours.
Spinning of the earth takes 24 hours.
So, our cells, our organs,
our wakefulness, our temperature,
but also our metabolism,
our immune system, our mood,
all of that is tethered to
the outside light-dark cycle.
And if we are living our
life in a perfect way,
where we wake up in the morning,
and we view sunlight as
it crosses the horizon,
and then by evening, we
catch a little sunlight
and then at night we're
in complete darkness,
we will be more or less perfectly matched
to the external or
ambient light-dark cycle.
Very few of us do that
because of these things that
we call artificial lights,
and this other thing that
we call life demands.
So today we're going to talk about
when we get pulled away from that rhythm.
Now you may immediately be thinking,
well, I've heard there are night owls
and there are mornings larks,
they're sometimes called
and their genetic polymorphisms,
that's just a fancy name for
genetic variations that make
some people want to wake up early
and other people want to stay up late
and teens want to sleep in more.
Sure, that's all true.
That's all true regardless
of what names we give those.
However, there's no escaping the fact
that human beings are a diurnal species.
We were designed, literally,
our cells and the circuits of our body
were constructed to be
awake during the daytime
and asleep at night.
How do I know that?
Well, I wasn't consulted
at the design phase,
but I'm certain of that
because many studies have shown
that when we deviate too
far from a diurnal schedule
and we try and become
nocturnal, we can pull it off,
but serious health effects,
both mental and physical,
start to arise.
I'm not going to spend much of today
talking about all the
negative effects of jet lag
I'll talk a little bit about it,
or the negative effects of shift work,
or trying to scare you
by telling you about the quite valid data
around depression, amnesia,
dementia, all the terrible
things that happen
when you're not sleeping well,
rather I'd like to
focus on what you can do
and arm you with tools.
So let's talk about that
perfect schedule for a moment.
And then let's talk about jet lag
and what jet lag really represents
and how to push back on jet
lag, shift your clock faster,
and escape some of the severe bad things
that can happen with jet lag.
Including just feeling miserable
when you're traveling
for work or vacation.
So what is the perfect day?
What does that look
like from our circadian
sleep-wakefulness standpoint?
I'm about to summarize what I've said in
the three previous podcast episodes,
as well as now countless Instagram posts.
Here's the deal.
You basically want to get as
much light, ideally sunlight,
but as much light into your eyes
during the period of each 24 hour cycle
when you want to be awake,
when you want to be alert.
And you want to get as
little light into your eyes
at the times of that 24 hour cycle
when you want to be asleep
or drowsy and falling asleep.
How much is enough?
Well, you don't want to go so high
with the light exposure
that you damage your eyes
because as many of you
have heard me say before,
the eyes are actually
two pieces of your brain,
your central nervous system
that were extruded out of your skull.
And as pieces of the central
nervous system, aka your brain,
they will not regenerate.
At least right now, the
technologies don't exist
to regenerate those neurons in humans
you do not want to damage them.
So what is too bright?
Well, when it's painful to look at.
When you have to blink or close your eyes
in order to bear it.
So please don't look
at very bright lights,
so painful that they're likely
going to damage your eyes.
However, if you get up in the morning,
and it's still dark out
and you want to be awake,
you would be wise to turn
on artificial lights,
in particular, overhead lights
for reasons I've discussed previously.
But those overhead lights will
optimally trigger the neurons,
these melanopsin cells in the retina
that will activate your circadian clock.
When the sun comes out,
even if there's cloud cover,
the sun does come out every day
regardless of where you live,
unless you live in a cave.
People have said to me,
well, I live in an area where
I can't really see the sun.
Well, the sun is there,
it might be hiding behind clouds,
unless it's very very dark where you live
like Scandinavia in the depths of winter
in which case you might
want some artificial light.
Get some sunlight in
your eyes when you can.
Here's the deal with
sunlight and artificial light
that I have not discussed previously.
A lot of photon energy,
a high amount of lux, L-U-X,
comes through even cloud cover.
A good number to shoot
for as a rule of thumb,
is to try and get exposure
to at least 100,000 lux before 9:00 AM.
10:00 AM maybe, but before 9:00 AM
assuming you're waking up
sometime between five and 8:00 AM.
Okay, so get 100,000 lux.
Now you do not, I want to repeat,
you do not want to stare at a 200,000 lux
or a 100,000 lux light.
It's very, very bright.
The mechanism of circadian clock setting
and this is very important,
the mechanism of circadian clock setting
involves these neurons in your eye
that send electrical signals
to this clock above the roof of your mouth
and that system sums,
meaning it adds photons,
it's a very slow system.
So let's say that I wake up
and I look at my computer screen
briefly or my phone screen.
That's probably 500 to 1,000 lux.
If I were to look at
that for a full minute,
I would get that photon energy
transferred into electrical
energy of neurons
and it would be communicated
to my circadian clock.
However, the signal that it's morning
will not have registered
with the circadian clock
unless I looked at that for
a hundred minutes or more,
so 100,000.
Now the problem is if you
wake up at eight o'clock,
you're not going to get enough
light from artificial light
before you reach what's called
the circadian dead zone.
So you have this opportunity
before 9:00 AM, maybe 10:00 AM
to capture enough photons,
and you have to do it with your eyes.
I've discussed why that's important
in previous episodes of the podcast,
we have to do it with your eyes.
There is no extra ocular photo reception.
This is not about vitamin D in your skin.
This is about setting your circadian clock
which is paramount for
mental and physical health.
So here we're talking
about trying to get that
at least 100,000 photons
but not all at once,
but you got to get them before
9:00 AM-ish, maybe 10:00 AM.
So what do you do?
You go outside.
If you want to get nerdy
about this quantitative,
you could download a
free app like Light Meter
and take a look around
your house with Light Meter
and you'll notice that
even bright overhead lights
are only emitting about
4,000 or 5,000 lux.
It's going to take a long while
of looking at those lights
with eyes open in order to
set your circadian clock
and tell your brain and
body that it's morning.
Going outside even on a cloudy day
could be 7,000, 10,000 lux.
It's really remarkable how bright it is,
meaning how much photon
energy is coming through.
So try and get 100,000
lux before that 9:00 AM.
Now, if you can't do that
because you live in an area of the world
where it's just not bright enough.
Some people have sent me
pictures from Northern England.
It's just not bright enough in winter.
Then sure, you can resort
to using artificial lights
in order to get enough photons.
And I'm putting out this
100,000 lux number as a target
to get each day before 9:00 AM.
You can in theory, get it
all from artificial lights,
but there are some special
qualities about sunlight
that make sunlight the better stimulus.
First of all, it's free
if it's available outside.
There is a number of different...
There are, excuse me, a number
of different technologies
kind of like this one like a light pad
that this one says it's a 930 lux.
I'm covering this up 'cause
I'm not trying to promote
any specific products.
I actually bought this just
with my own money on Amazon,
they're not a sponsor.
And it lets you toggle the brightness,
I think by holding this on,
holding down this button,
you can make it dimmer or brighter.
There's about 1,000 lux,
it seems really bright,
but a cloudy day outside
will have five times more
photon energy coming through.
So some people set these
lights or ring lights
that they use for selfies
and that kind of thing
near their coffee or workstation
first thing in the morning
but you really want to get sunlight, okay?
So those things are kind of
nice because they'll travel
and we're going to talk about jet lag.
But I can't emphasize this enough
that light has to be captured and summed
before you enter the circadian dead zone
which is the middle of the day.
This is again, trying to achieve
kind of perfect schedule.
Then I've recommended, based
on scientific literature,
that you look at sunlight sometime around
the time when the sun is setting
and the reason for that of course
is because it adjusts down
the sensitivity of your eyes
because here's the diabolical thing.
While we need a lot of photon
energy early in the day
to wake up our system and
set our circadian clock,
and prepare us for a good night's sleep
14 to 16 hours later,
it takes very little photon energy
to reset and shift our
clock after 8:00 PM.
And that's why you want to,
as much as you safely can,
avoid bright light and
even not so bright light
between the hours of 10
or 11:00 PM and 4:00 AM.
A number of people have asked
me some questions about this.
And the last episode I
went into red lights,
I went ahead and discussed blue blockers,
all that kind of stuff, so I'm
not going to repeat all that.
But here's the thing, if
you see afternoon light,
you're going to adjust down
the sensitivity of your eyes
so that you have a little
bit more wiggle room,
a little bit more leeway
to view lights from screens
and overhead lights even
late at night without
disrupting your circadian clock.
But it is a kind of a double-edged sword
where you need a lot of
light early in the day
and you need to avoid bright
lights later in the day.
I've mentioned studies on here,
a number of you have asked
about getting the references.
We are in the process of
trying to get a webpage
going with full links.
There's some copyright issues
that we have to deal with.
But wherever possible, I'll
try and reference these studies
and when people ask
I'll generally put them
in the response to their
comments on YouTube or Instagram.
There have been two studies
done from University of Colorado,
both published in Current Biology.
You can easily find these online
by just googling the
words, Current Biology,
camping and reset circadian clocks,
that have shown that two days
of waking up with the sun
and avoiding light at night,
they actually took
graduate students camping,
what a cool experiment to be a part of,
reset the melatonin and cortisol rhythms
for these people that had otherwise
drifted quite far from
their natural rhythms.
There're other things that
you can do to shift your clock
and to reinforce your clock.
Like exercising more
or less the same time,
eating more or less the same time, etc.
That's not what today's episode is about.
So I just described perfect schedule.
Get at least 100,000 lux of
light exposure to the eyes
not all at once, but
summing across the morning.
Again you know when it's too much
because it's painful to look at,
so that's obviously something to avoid.
But then once the middle of the day,
let's say, you're waking up at 10 or 11
you go outside the sun's
overhead, forget it,
you're not going to shift
your clock, you're just not.
It doesn't work that way.
In the evening, you see the evening light
and you want to get that light
to adjust down your retinal sensitivity
to afford you a bit of a
buffer so that late at night,
if you happen to look at screens
or go to the bathroom in
the middle of the night,
it's not going to shift your clock
because it takes probably only about
1,000 to 1500 lux of light energy
to shift your clock in
the middle of the night.
So let's talk about shifting clocks
because for the jet lagged person,
this ability to shift the clock
with light, temperature,
exercise, and food
is vitally important
for getting onto the new local schedule.
And there's so much out
there about jet lag today.
I'm going to dial it down to
one very specific parameter
that all of you can figure out
without any technology or devices
and can apply for when you
travel for work or pleasure,
or anytime you're jet lagged,
and I want to absolutely emphasize
that you don't have to
travel to get jet lagged.
Many of you are jet lagged.
You're jet lagged because
you're looking at your phone
in the middle of the night,
you're jet lagged 'cause you're waking up
at different times a day,
you're jet lagged because
your exercise is on a
kind of chaotic regime,
some days at this time,
some days at that time.
And if that works for you, great.
I want to be really clear that
a number of people always say,
well, I know so and so that
you know only needed
four hours of sleep and,
or they're just fine,
they traveled to Europe
and they're just fine.
There's a lot of individual variability.
And we're going to talk about
the origins of some of that variability.
I mean, I know people
that can eat anything
and somehow seem to maintain
great lipid profiles
and you know, body weight
and fitness ability.
And I know some people
that they eat one cracker
and they sort of dissolve into a puddle of
kind of tears, right, because
they think that that's going to
throw them off and maybe
it does, I don't know.
There's a tremendous amount
of variability out there.
So, this is really about
optimal and what's possible.
And you have to ask,
I can just say from personal experience,
I suffer terribly from jet lag,
traveling in certain
directions but not others.
Some people don't have
trouble with jet lag.
Many people will travel to a new location,
they feel great for
the first day and night
and then they crash and
they have trouble sleeping.
Or they travel back and
they have a terrible time
getting back onto a normal schedule.
And some of this varies with age
and some of it varies with genetics
and there is no simple pill
or anything that you can take
to just get rid of jet lag.
It doesn't work that way.
If it worked that way, I would tell you.
But there are some simple
things that you can do.
I'm going to arm you with the knowledge
of what jet lag is and how it works.
And contrary to what many people
out there say and believe,
I know that understanding mechanism
affords you more flexibility.
Why understand mechanism as just opposed
to me just writing up a PDF
and giving you a list of things to do?
Well, what happens when
you can't do those things
in exactly the way they're written down.
When you understand mechanism,
you understand how to control the machine
that is your biological
system, your nervous system.
So a little bit of
understanding about mechanism
goes a really long way.
So that's where we're headed.
Let's talk about what jet lag is.
Okay well, I promised that
I wouldn't get too dark
with all the terrible things
that can happen with jet lag,
but I'm about to get dark.
There are quality peer reviewed papers
showing that jet lag
will shorten your life.
It will kill you earlier.
I guess it means you'll die earlier.
It doesn't actually kill you necessarily.
Although there are many
cases where tourists
end up stepping in front of buses,
especially in countries
where the cars and buses
drive on the opposite side of the street
that they're used to,
who are jet lagged and
lose their life that way.
Jet lag is a serious thing.
Sure we have a family story about this.
When I was growing up,
I had a family member
travel overseas for work
and take a sleeping pill, I
won't name the sleeping pill,
though at the end I'm going
to talk about sleeping pills,
and had a case of total
amnesia for a week.
That's not entirely uncommon.
If you've ever been really
jet lagged and fallen asleep,
doesn't even have to be in the
middle of the day, woken up,
you might not know where you are.
And that's because time and space
are really linked in the brain,
wasn't designed to be
transported four, five six hours
into a new time zone, it just wasn't.
Our brain and the biological mechanisms
that govern circadian timing
were designed to be
shifted by a couple hours,
not necessarily six or nine or 12 hours.
So you can really mess yourself up.
I've had that experience,
I usually experience it
as fluctuations in mood.
I flew 12 hours out of phase,
to Abu Dhabi once, to give
a talk at NYU Abu Dhabi,
and it was a mess.
I actually was getting vertigo.
I wasn't hallucinating but
I was really out of it.
And my mood was just all over the place.
And it was very bizarre.
Jet lag, even if you don't experience it
as mood shifts or amnesia,
it can shorten your life.
Now here's what's interesting.
Traveling westward on the globe
is always easier than
traveling eastward, okay?
It's interesting because
the effects of jet lag on longevity,
have shown that traveling east
takes more years off your
life than traveling west.
Now, of course, traveling 30
minutes into a new time zone
or just one time zone over,
or two times zone over rather,
is far less detrimental to
your biology and psychology
than a eight hour shift
or a nine hour shift.
Now, here's what's interesting.
When we think about the
effects of jet lag on longevity
or this idea that it
can shorten our lives,
we have to ask ourselves why, why is that?
And it turns out there's a pretty simple
explanation for this.
We've talked before about
the autonomic nervous system,
this set of neurons in our
spinal cord and body and brain
that regulate our wakefulness
and our sleepiness.
Turns out that human beings,
and probably most species,
are better able to activate and stay alert
than they are to shut
down their nervous system
and go to sleep on demand.
So if you really have to push,
and you really have to
stay awake, you can do it,
you can stay up later.
But falling asleep earlier is harder.
And that's why traveling east
has a number of different
features associated with it,
that because you're traveling east
you're trying to go to
bed earlier, you know.
As a Californian, if
I go to New York city,
I've got to get to bed three hours early
and wake up three hours early,
much harder than coming back to California
and just staying up a few more hours.
And this probably has roots in
evolutionary adaptation where
under conditions where we need
to suddenly gather up and go
or forge for food, or fight,
or do any number of different things,
that we can push ourselves
through the release of
adrenaline and epinephrin
to stay awake.
Whereas being able to slow down
and deliberately fall asleep
is actually much harder to do.
So there's an asymmetry to
our autonomic nervous system
that plays out in the
asymmetry of jet lag.
So, if you want to read up on this,
because people have asked me
about papers, you can look,
there's a paper published
by Davidson and colleagues,
2006, in Current Biology that talks about
the differences in life span
for frequent eastward versus westward,
versus no travel and longevity and etc.
A number of different
biological markers of longevity.
So going east is harder
because going to sleep earlier is harder,
if you're trying to do that on demand.
Many people have turned to melatonin
as a way to try and induce sleepiness.
I'm going to talk about
melatonin at the end.
I've mentioned on previous podcasts,
a number of you have
asked for the evidence
that melatonin is potentially detrimental
to some hormone systems,
melatonin is a hormone.
And I'll discuss that at the end,
in particular, the role of melatonin
in suppressing a hormone pathway
that involves luteinizing hormone
testosterone in men and
estrogen in females.
As well as a really
interesting peptide called
kisspeptin, that's a cool name.
All right, well, let's think
about travel and what happens.
Let's say you're not
going eastward or westward
but you're going north or south.
So if you go from for instance,
Washington DC to Santiago Chile,
or you go from Tel Aviv, Israel,
to Cape town, South Africa,
you're just north and south, right?
And not either direction.
You're not really moving
into a different time zone,
you're not shifting.
So you will experience travel fatigue.
And turns out that jet
lag has two elements,
travel fatigue and time zone jet lag.
Time zone jet lag is simply
the inability of local
sunlight and local darkness
to match to your internal rhythm,
this endogenous rhythm that you have.
So before we get too complicated
and too down in the weeds about this,
I want to just throw out
a couple important things.
First of all, I mentioned this earlier,
but some people suffer from jet lag a lot,
other people not so much.
Most people experience worse
jet lag as they get older.
There are reasons for that
because early in life,
patterns of melatonin release
are very stable and flat and
very high actually in children.
It's one of the reasons why
they don't undergo puberty.
Then it becomes cyclical during puberty,
meaning it comes on once every 24 hours
and turns off once every 24
hours, it cycles, cyclic.
And then as we get older,
the cycles get more disrupted
and we become more vulnerable
to even small changes in
schedule, etc, meal times, right?
So, jet lag gets worse as we age.
In addition, there are other
things that happen with age
that people start doing less exercise,
their digestion can get worse, etc.
So some of the effects of age
might not be direct
effects of getting older
but some of the things that are
correlated with being older.
Like people who are willing
to have a regular exercise regime
can use that exercise regime
to shift their circadian clock.
And I have a good friend,
his father is in his 80s.
He's still pushing out 25,
30 push-ups each morning,
he's on the Peloton or whatever it is,
doing a lot of cycling.
So some 80-year olds are
doing that, many are not,
many 30 year olds are not.
But if you have a
regular exercise program,
that's going to make it easier
to shift your circadian clock
for the sake of jet lag.
And it's actually a knob you can turn
and you can leverage
for shifting your clock.
Before we go any further,
I want to make changing your
internal rhythm really easy.
Or at least as easy
and as simple as one could
possibly make it, I believe.
What I want to talk about
is perhaps one of the most
important things to know
about your body and brain,
which is called your
temperature minimum, okay?
Most of you know your approximate weight,
some of you might even
know your blood pressure,
know your body mass index,
some of you might know other
things about your biology
that have fancy names,
but everyone should know
their temperature minimum.
Your temperature minimum
doesn't require a thermometer to measure,
although you could measure it.
Your temperature minimum is the
point in every 24 hour cycle
when your temperature is lowest.
Now, how do you measure
that without a thermometer?
It tends to fall 90 minutes to two hours
before your average waking time.
So I want to repeat that,
your temperature minimum
tends to fall 90 minutes
to two hours before
your average waking time.
So let's say you're not traveling
and your typical wake up time is 5:30 AM.
Your temperature minimum is
very likely 3:30 AM or 4:00 AM.
If you want, if any of you want to,
you can measure your temperature minimum.
You can get a thermometer
and you can measure your
temperature every couple hours
for 24 hours, and you can
find your temperature minimum.
What you're going to find is that
you have a low point,
the temperature minimum,
and then your temperature
will start to rise,
you'll wake up about two hours later.
Then your temperature
will continue to rise
into the afternoon it will peak,
maybe a little trough,
sometimes that happens,
and then it'll start declining slowly
as you approach nighttime.
There are things that will
disrupt that temperature pattern.
Saunas, cold baths, intense exercise, etc.
Meals tend to have a thermogenic effect
that increases temperature
slightly little blips,
but the overall cycle 24
hour cycle of temperature
has this pattern.
And last time I talked
about the seminal work
of Joe Takahashi and others,
who have shown that temperature
actually is the signal by which
this clock above the roof of your mouth
in-trains or collectively
pushes all the cells
and tissues of our body
to be on the same schedule.
Temperature is the effector.
And once you hear that there
should be an immediate,
oh, of course, because
how else would you get
all these different diverse cell types
to follow one pattern, right?
A pancreatic cell does
something very different
than a spleen cell or a neuron, right?
They're all doing different
things at different rates.
So the temperature signal can go out
and then each one of those
can interpret the temperature signal
as one unified and consistent
theme of their environment.
So temperatures vary
from person to person.
Some people are 98.6, some
people run a little colder, etc.
But you have a low point,
and you have a high point.
Know your temperature minimum.
How are you going to figure
out this temperature minimum?
The temperature minimum can be determined
by taking the last three
to five wake up times.
So let's say you wake up 7:00 AM,
8:00 AM, 3:00 AM, all right it happens.
Take those, add them
together, average them
by adding them up and dividing
by the number of days,
that'll give you the average.
If you're one of these people
that wakes up at 3:00 AM
and then goes back to
sleep and sleep till 10,
your wake up time was 10:00 AM.
If you use an alarm clock,
your wake-up time is still
when you get up, okay?
I know alarm clocks have
been kind of demonized
but in my world
being late and missing
appointments is also demonized,
so I use an alarm clock.
Many people will wake up at
exactly the same time each day,
there tends to some variation for people.
Some people it's going to vary
depending on life circumstances.
But average that for
three to seven days or so.
Take that wake up time,
you can then get an average
or sort of typical temperature minimum.
Okay, so now you know how to
get your temperature minimum.
Your temperature minimum is
your absolute reference point
for shifting your circadian clock.
Whether or not it's for
jet lag, or shift work,
or some other purpose.
Here's the deal.
If you expose your eyes to bright light
in the four hours, maybe five or six,
but in the four hours after
your temperature minimum,
your circadian clock
will shift so that you
will tend to get up earlier
and go to sleep earlier in
the subsequent days, okay?
So it's called a phase advance,
if you'd like to read up on this further.
You advance your clock, okay?
However, if you view bright light
in the four to six hours before
your temperature minimum,
you will tend to phase delay your clock.
You will tend to wake up
later and go to sleep later.
Okay, I'm going to repeat this
because there's so much
confusion out there
and people talk about
circadian time and all this.
Find your temperature minimum.
I tend to wake up at about 6:00 AM,
sometimes 6:30, sometimes seven.
It depends a lot on what I
was doing the night before
as I'm guessing it does for you.
But that means that my temperature minimum
is probably somewhere
right around 4:30 AM.
Which means that if I wake up at 4:30 AM
and I were to view
bright light at 4:35 AM,
I'm going to advance my clock.
I'm going to want to go to bed
earlier the subsequent night
and wake up earlier
the subsequent morning.
And as I shift my wake-up time,
my temperature minimum shifts too, right?
Because each time we
shift our wake-up time
our temperature minimum shifts,
assuming that wake up time
shifts more than 30
minutes or an hour, okay.
If I were to view bright light
in the four to six hours
before 4:30 AM, guess what?
The next night I'm going
to want to stay up later
and I'm going to want to wake
up later the subsequent morning.
Your temperature minimum
is a reference point
not a temperature reading.
Again, if you want to measure
your temperature minimum
and figure out what it is,
98 point whatever or 96
point whatever, that's fine.
You can do that.
But that information won't help you.
What you need to know is what time
your body temperature is lowest
and understand that in
the four hours or so
just after that time,
viewing light will advance your clock
to make you want to get up earlier.
And the four hours before
your temperature minimum,
viewing light will make
you want to stay up later.
Now, some people might be saying,
well, I wake up early and
I want to stay up late
and I'm sleepy all day and
I'm a mess or I feel fine.
Look, let's talk about feeling fine.
Turns out the definition of insomnia
is when you're experiencing
excessive sleepiness during the day.
Sleepiness and fatigue
are different, okay?
So in the world of sleep medicine
fatigue is a physical exhaustion,
sleepiness is falling asleep.
Like falling asleep at your desk
or falling asleep during lectures,
or there seems to be something
special about my lectures
that makes people want to fall asleep.
So if this cures your insomnia fantastic,
however, in all seriousness,
sleepiness during the day time
unless it's around your temperature peak
and only lasts about 90 minutes or so,
is a sign of insomnia.
It's a sign of lack of sleep.
I want to be very, very clear that
if you know your temperature minimum,
you can shift your clock using light.
You can also shift your
clock by engaging in exercise
in the four hours after
your temperature minimum
to wake up earlier on subsequent nights,
or exercise before then
to delay your clock, okay?
So now you can start to see and understand
the logic of the system.
And we'll talk about why this works
and the underlying biology,
but understanding that
temperature is the effector
and understanding that
you have this low point
that reflects your most sleepy point,
essentially right before waking up,
and then temperature rises,
you can now start to
shift that temperature
according to your travel needs.
Here's one way in which you might do that.
Let's say I am going to travel to Europe,
which is nine hours ahead
typically, from California.
I would want to determine
my temperature minimum
which for me is about
4:30 AM maybe 5:00 AM,
and I would want to start getting up
at about 5:30 AM and getting
some bright light exposure,
presumably from artificial sources
because the sunlight isn't
going to be out at that time.
Maybe even exercising as well,
maybe even eating a meal at that time
if that's in your practice.
You would want to start doing that
two or three days before travel.
Because, once you land
in or I land in Europe,
chances are just viewing the
sunrise or sunset in Europe
is not going to allow me to
shift my circadian clock.
Some people say get sunlight
in your eyes when you land
but that's not going to work
because one of two things
is likely to happen.
With a nine hour shift like that
either I'm going to view sunlight
at a time that corresponds
to the circadian dead zone,
the time in which my circadian
clock can't be shifted,
or I'm going to end up viewing sunlight
at a time that corresponds to
the four to six hour window
before my temperature minimum.
So it's going to shift me in
exactly the opposite direction
that I want to go.
So it can be very, very challenging
for people to adjust to jet lag.
So you need to ask, am I traveling east
or am I traveling west?
Am I trying to advance my
clock or delay my clock?
Remember viewing light,
exercise and eating
in the four to six hours
before your temperature minimum
will delay your clock.
Eating, viewing sunlight, and exercising,
you don't have to do all three
but some combination of those
in the four to six hours
after your temperature minimum
will advance your clock.
And this is a powerful mechanism
by which you can shift your clock anywhere
from one to three hours per
day, which is remarkable.
That means your temperature
minimum is going to shift out
as much as three hours, which
can make it such that you can
travel all the way to Europe
and in as long as you've
prepared for a day or so
by doing what I described back home
and then doing it when you arrive,
you can potentially accomplish
the entire shift within
anywhere from 24 to 36 hours.
And this is really important to emphasize
that once you arrive in your new location
and here I'm talking
about traveling eastward,
California to Europe, once you
arrive in your new location,
you have to keep track
of what your temperature
minimum was back home
and how it's being
shifted during your trip.
Now it's much easier to do than you think.
One of the unfortunate consequences
of the smartphone is that
you can't do something goofy
like wearing two watches.
One watch that corresponds
to the time back home
and another one that
corresponds to the local time.
Typically it updates
automatically based on wifi, etc.
But if you can keep track
of the time back home
then you can easily shift
your clock going forward.
I'm hoping this will makes sense.
I really want to emphasize
that you don't have to be
precise down to the minute.
Some of you may be asking, well,
what about you've got
this temperature minimum
and if I view light one minute before it
then I'm going to delay my
clock and one minute after it
I'm going to advance my clock.
It doesn't quite work like that, okay.
But it's very important to understand
that light is the primary way
in which we can shift our clock.
And now you should also
be able to understand
things like the circadian
dead zone from about
9:30, 10:00 AM all the way until
six hours before your temperature minimum.
You're not going to shift your clock.
Nothing that you do in that time
in terms of light viewing
behavior, feeding, etc,
is going to shift your clock.
And so a lot of people
are landing in Europe
getting sunlight in their eyes
and throwing their clock out of whack
or not shifting their clock at all.
This brings me to the other
thing that's highly recommended.
And I've mentioned this before,
but you want to eat on
the local meal schedule.
If it's in your practice
to fast, fast, that's fine.
But when you eat, you want to eat
within the local schedule for alertness.
Okay.
That means if you arrive and
everyone's eating breakfast
and you can't stomach
the idea of breakfast
in your new location 'cause
your appetite isn't there.
That means the clock in your liver,
you have a clock in your
liver, biological clock,
has not caught up to the new time zone.
You can force yourself to eat if you like,
or you can skip that meal.
But what you don't want to do
is stay on your home meal schedule,
waking up in the middle
of the night and eating.
That is really going to throw things off
because a lot of the
clocks in the periphery
like from the liver, the peripheral body,
will send information back to the brain
and then the brain is getting
really conflicted signals.
So the temperature minimum
is really your anchor point
for shifting your clock best.
I don't know why this
information really hasn't made it
into the popular sphere, quite so much.
There's all sorts of stuff about
taking things like melatonin,
using binaural beats,
a lot of kind of like more
sophisticated, complicated,
and potentially problematic
ways of trying to shift the clock.
Let's talk about melatonin
but first I just want to pause
and shift gears a little bit
because I talked about traveling eastward,
but we haven't talked
about traveling westward.
So I want to do that now.
Let's say you're raveling
from New York to California
or from Europe to California.
The challenge there tends to be,
how can you stay up late enough?
Now, some people are able to do this
because as I mentioned earlier,
the autonomic nervous system
is asymmetrically wired
such that it's easier to stay up late
later than we would naturally want to
than it is to go to sleep earlier.
So let's say you land and it's 4:00 PM
and you're just dying,
you're in California,
you came from Europe, it's 4:00 PM
and you really, really
want to go to sleep.
That's where the use of things
like caffeine, exercise,
and sunlight can shift you, right?
If it's after your temperature peak
then viewing sunlight
around 6:00 PM or 8:00 PM
or artificial light, if
there isn't sunlight,
will help shift you later, right?
It's going to delay your clock
and you're going to be
able to stay up later.
The worst thing you can do is take a nap
that was intended to last
20 minutes or an hour.
I do this routinely and then
wake up four hours later
or you wake up and it's midnight
and you can't fall back asleep.
You really want to avoid doing that.
So provided it's not excessive amounts,
stimulants like caffeine and coffee or tea
can really help you push
past that afternoon barrier
and get you to sleep more
like on the local schedule.
And eating on the local schedule as well.
A number of people have asked about
the use of melatonin to induce sleepiness.
All right, well let's think
about what melatonin is.
Melatonin is this hormone
that's released from the pineal
gland, which is this gland.
A couple of notes about the pineal,
'cause I've been getting a
lot of questions about this.
I'm probably going to
draw some fire for this
but I'd be happy to have a
thoughtful, considerate debate,
with some peer reviewed
papers in front of us.
The pineal does make this
hallucinogenic molecule
they call DMT,
but in such a minuscule amounts
that it is not responsible
for the hallucinations you
see in sleep and dreaming.
Sorry, folks.
It's also not responsible
for the hallucinations you might see
through other approaches to DMT.
It's just not, that's not
where the DMT comes from.
It's infinitesimally small amounts.
There are a lot of kind
of wacky claims out there
about calcification of
the pineal and fluoride
and this kind of thing.
Look, the pineal sits
in an area of the brain
near the fourth ventricle,
where the skull is not terribly far away
although there's some
overlap in neural tissue
and with age there's some aggregation
of some of the meninges and
other things around there
that stick to the skull.
Young brains don't look like old brains
but there's no calcification
of the pineal, all right?
So you can forget about
calcification of the pineal
as a problem.
I don't know where that
whole thing got started
but that's not an issue.
Your pineal will churn out
melatonin your whole life.
Melatonin induces sleepiness.
Melatonin during development
is also responsible
for timing the secretion
of certain hormones
that are vitally important for puberty.
Does melatonin control
the onset of puberty?
Not directly, but indirectly.
Melatonin inhibits something called
gonadotropin-releasing hormone,
which is a hormone that's
released from your hypothalamus
also roughly above the roof
of your mouth in your brain.
Gonadotropin-releasing
hormone is really interesting
'cause it stimulates the
release of another hormone
called luteinizing hormone,
which in females causes
estrogen to be released
within the ovaries,
it's involved in reproductive cycles,
and in males stimulates testosterone
from the sertoli cells of the testes.
Melatonin is inhibitory to GnRH,
gonadotropin-releasing hormone,
and therefore is inhibitory
to LH, luteinizing hormone,
to testosterone and estrogen.
There's just no two ways about it.
There is immense amount
of data on the fact that
high levels of melatonin in
seasonally breeding animals,
takes the ovaries from
nice and robust ovaries
that are capable of deploying
eggs and this kind of thing
and literally shrinking them
and making these animals infertile.
These are very high levels of melatonin
in seasonal breeders in winter.
Melatonin in males of seasonal breeders
takes the testes and shrinks them.
Long ago when I was at UC,
Berkeley as a master's student,
I was working on neuroendocrinology,
and we were working on
this hamster species of seasonal breeders.
And basically when days are
long, which inhibits melatonin,
these little Siberian
hamsters as they're called,
have testes about the size of,
sort of typical table grapes,
although that's a weird way to put it.
When days get shorter and the
melatonin signal gets longer
because light inhibits melatonin,
days get shorter, melatonin gets longer.
Those same hamsters would have testes
that would involute to the
size of about a grain of rice.
Now this does not happen
in humans in short days.
But nonetheless, the melatonin
signal really does have
a ton of effects on the hormone system.
Now, does that mean that if
you've been taking melatonin
you've really screwed up your hormones?
Not necessarily.
Does it mean if a kid
has been taking melatonin
that's really screwing up their puberty?
Not necessarily and here's why.
Melatonin operates on
a concentration level.
So in a child that's very, very small
that has high levels of melatonin,
it actually can inhibit GnRH, LH,
testosterone or estrogen
depending on the sex of the child.
But as that child grows
through other mechanisms,
like growth hormone release, etc,
that same amount of melatonin
released from the pineal
is now diluted over a much larger body
so that the concentration
actually goes way, way down, okay?
But here's the problem with
supplementing melatonin.
As I mentioned in the previous episode,
concentrations of melatonin
in many commercial supplements
have been shown to be
anywhere from 85% to 400%
of what's listed on the bottle.
So when you take melatonin
or a child takes melatonin
oftentimes they are
taking super physiological
levels of melatonin,
which at least by my
read, and the literature,
says that it could have dramatic effects
on timing and course
of things like puberty.
So it's not so much that the
journals have come out saying,
oh, taking that melatonin
inhibits puberty,
it's that no single study has been done
with the super physiological
levels of melatonin
that are present in a
lot of these supplements
in developing children.
So melatonin is used widely
for inducing sleepiness
when you want to fall asleep
in the new location that
you've arrived, right?
You can't fall asleep, you take melatonin,
it helps you fall asleep.
It does not help you stay asleep.
In addition to that, melatonin
has been kind of touted
as the best way to shift
your circadian clock.
I'm happy to go on record saying,
look, if you need melatonin,
you can work with a doctor
or somebody who really understands
circadian and sleep biology go
for it, if that's your thing.
But I, as always on this
podcast and elsewhere,
I have a bias toward behavioral things
that you can titrate and control
like exposure to light
exercise, temperature, etc,
that have much bigger margins for safety
and certainly don't have
these other endocrine effects
that we've been thinking
about and talking about.
So if you want to take
melatonin in the afternoon
in order to fall asleep or in the evening,
be my guest, that's up to you.
Again, you're responsible
for your health, not me.
But for many people
melatonin is not going
to be the best solution.
The best solution is going to be to use
light and temperature, and exercise
on either side of the temperature minimum
to shift your clock both before your trip
and when you land in your new location
and your clock starts to shift.
Okay, so now you know my
opinions about melatonin,
feel free to filter them through
your own opinions and
experiences with melatonin.
And now you also understand
what your temperature minimum is
and how it represents
an important landmark
either side of which you can use
light, temperature, and
exercise to shift your clock.
Just to remind you a little
bit about temperature,
if you want to shift your clock,
typically you would do that
by you can take a hot shower
and then that will have a cooling effect
after the hot shower.
And if you were to get into a cold shower
or an ice bath if you have access to one,
afterward there's going
to be a thermogenic effect
of your body increasing temperature.
And if you just think about
your natural rhythm back home
when everything's stable,
you have an idea a low point
in which is your temperature minimum,
and then you have a peak,
and you think about when you're doing this
hot or cold shower in that rhythm,
now you should be able to understand
how you're shifting your rhythm.
That temperature rhythm is
the one that's going to move.
Give you an example.
If I were to wake up in the morning
and let's say I wake up at 6:00 AM.
My temperature I know is rising,
I've passed my temperature minimum.
If I were to get into a hot shower,
that would then lower my body
temperature when I got out,
that is not normally what's happening
first thing in the morning, and therefore
my clock would very likely
get phase delayed, right?
It's going to delay the
increase in temperature.
Whereas if I got into a cold shower,
something I don't personally like to do,
but I've done from time
to time or an ice bath
that's going to then
have a rebound increase
in body temperature
and is going to phase advance my clock.
That peak in the
afternoon is going to come
about an hour earlier.
I'm going to want to go to
bed earlier, later that night.
So you can start to play these games
with timing and hot and cold,
with meals whether or not
you eat, or you don't eat,
and with light exposure,
whether or not you view light
or you don't view light.
So now you can start to
see why understanding
the core mechanics of a system
can really give you the
most flexibility because
I could spend the next 25 years of my life
answering every question about every
nuance pattern of travel.
Well, we're going to Sydney
and then we're going there,
what should I do?
But that's on you.
You need to figure out
your temperature minimum
and your temperature peak,
if you like, and then
use these parameters to
it gives you flexibility.
And that really underscores
the most important thing
is that when you understand
mechanism it's not about
being neurotically attached
to a specific protocol,
it's the opposite.
It gives you power to not
be neurotically attached
to a specific protocol.
It can give you great
confidence and flexibility
in being able to shift your
body rhythms however you want.
And when things get out of whack
you can tuck them right back into place.
One thing that's common
is that people need to do a quick trip.
It's not always that
you're going to go to,
you know on vacation for two weeks or,
you know, work someplace
else for weeks on end.
If your trip is 48 hours or less,
stay on your home schedule.
This can be tough and it may
require scheduling meetings
according to your home schedule,
but if you can somehow manage that
the best thing to do would be
to stay on your home schedule.
Your clock is not going to
shift more than a couple hours,
even if you do everything correctly
in one day, okay?
So if I were to travel, say to Europe,
I've actually done this,
I did a 24 hour trip
to Basel, Switzerland,
gave a talk and came back,
people thought I was crazy but,
I had a little bit of travel fatigue
'cause remember there's fatigue
from the actual travel experience.
The novelty of it, the air
is never great on the planes,
this was even true before
there were mask requirements
and things like that.
There's the travel fatigue
but you don't throw your clock off.
If you stay 48 hours,
then you start to shift a little bit.
72, that's when you start
running into trouble.
The transit time is also important
but I would say if it's
three days or less,
stay on your home schedule
as much as you can.
And because sunlight
isn't under your control
unless there's something
about you I don't know,
that's when traveling with
some sort of bright light
like the light pad that I have
down there that I showed earlier,
for those of you listening just on audio,
it sort of looks like an eight
and a half by 11 inch pad.
It's actually not designed for wake up,
it's actually designed,
it's a drawing pad,
and it emits about 1,000 lux of light.
And so if you want to travel
with something like that,
you can use that in your hotel room
to wake up when you like.
Some people will use night shades,
you know, not the night
shades that you eat
or that some people say
you're not supposed to eat,
I don't know anything about that,
but the eye covers to keep light out.
Those can be very useful on
planes and in hotels and so on.
So you can use light and dark
or you can travel with
your light and dark devices
so that you can stay on your home schedule
and get most of your light
when it would be your normal
wake up time back home.
And what's kind of nice is if you know
when your circadian
dead zone is back home,
which is generally for most people around
10:00 AM to about 3:00 PM,
so basically the rising
phase of your temperature,
then you can also feel free to be outside
without having to wear sunglasses
or you don't have to worry
about light exposure.
But if you know that window
before your temperature minimum,
that four to six hour window,
that's the time when if
you're viewing a lot of light
in your new location,
you are going to shift your
clock pretty considerably
and then you can come back
home and have a terrible time.
At the end of graduate
school, I went to Australia,
remarkable country, incredible
people, incredible wildlife,
had amazing time, I came back
and it was the first time in my life
where I couldn't sleep
on a regular schedule.
I was sleeping in like
hour long increments throughout
the day, it was a nightmare.
And it took me weeks
to get back on target.
And the way I was able to do that
was exercising consistently at
the same time every 24 hours,
turning my home into
essentially a cave at night,
even covering up the windows
and then getting as much
bright light in my eyes
as I possibly could during
the day, no sunglasses, etc.
So it can take some real work
if your clock gets thrown out of whack.
There's a phenomenon called ICU psychosis,
where people that are in
the intensive care unit in hospitals
actually lose their mind.
They become psychotic,
hallucinations, etc.
And it's because of
altered circadian cycles.
We know this 'cause they're
exposed to these lights
and these sounds, people
coming in and checking on them.
They leave the hospital or in some cases,
there have been experiments
where people are placed
near a window where they
get some natural light
and the psychotic symptoms disappear,
presuming there weren't
psychotic symptoms beforehand,
before they entered the hospital.
So it's pretty dramatic what light can do
to the psyche and to the body.
So let's talk a little bit
about a different form of jet lag
that requires no planes,
no trains, no automobiles,
and that's shift work.
Shift work is becoming
increasingly common.
Many of us are shift working
even though we don't have to.
We're doing work in the
middle of the night,
we are, you know, working on
our computers at odd hours,
sleeping during the day.
A lot of people who are under
shelter and place type stuff,
are doing more of this.
Kids with the drifting school schedules.
Here's the deal with shift work.
If there's one rule of
thumb for shift work,
it's that if at all possible,
you want to stay on the same
schedule for at least 14 days,
including weekends.
Now that should immediately
cue the non shift workers
to the importance of not
getting too far off track
on the weekend, even if
you're not a shift worker.
So sleeping in on Sunday
is not a good idea.
The most important thing about shift work
is to stay consistent with your schedule.
Now, I had a conversation
on an Instagram live
with Samer Hattar, who's a neuroscientist
at the National Institutes
of Mental Health,
he's actually the head of
the chronobiology unit there.
And he was really emphasizing
this point because shift work
where people are doing
the so-called swing shift,
where they're working
four days on one shift
and four days on or another,
is extremely detrimental to a
number of health parameters.
It gets the cortisol
release from the adrenals
really out of whack.
And there're these cortisol spikes at
various hours of the day,
it messes up learning,
it really disrupts the
dopamine system and wellbeing.
It is a serious, serious problem.
So if you can negotiate with your employer
to stay on the same shift
for two weeks at a time,
that's going to be immensely beneficial
and will help you offset
a lot of the negative
effects of shift work.
Now, I don't presume that
all of you are going
to be able to do that.
Some of you just don't
have that level of control.
And of course, I want to acknowledge that
shift workers are essential, right?
Of course, first responders, firefighters,
police officers, paramedics, etc,
but also pilots, night nurses,
people working on the hospital wards,
people picking up trash.
These night shifts are critical
to our functioning as a society,
as I'm sure all of you can appreciate.
If you're going to work a shift where
let's say, you start at 4:00
PM and you end at 2:00 AM,
excuse me, then there's some
important questions that arise.
For instance, should you
see light during your shift?
Well, this is a matter of personal choice
but ideally you want to view
as much light as possible
and as is safely possible
when you need to be alert.
So that would mean from 4:00 PM to 2:00 AM
and then you would want to sleep.
So using light as a correlate of alertness
and using darkness as a
correlate of sleepiness,
what this means is see as
much light as you safely can
during the phase of your day
when you want to be awake.
So it's the same thing I said
way back at the beginning
of this podcast episode.
And see as little light as safely possible
and it allows you to
function during the time
when you want to be asleep.
So if you're finishing
out that 2:00 AM shift,
that's when you would want to
avoid bright light exposure,
you'd want to go home,
you'd really want to avoid
watching TV if possible.
If you need that in order to fall asleep,
that would be a case where
something like dimming the
screen, plus blue blockers,
if that's in your practice
or you want to do that would be helpful
and then going to sleep and
then you'll probably wake up
late in the afternoon or early afternoon.
Some of you might say, wait,
Huberman, I thought you
don't like blue blockers.
I never said I don't like blue blockers.
I don't like people wearing blue blockers
at the time of day when
they want to be alert.
And I don't like people
asserting that blue blockers
can prevent circadian shifts
simply because people are wearing them.
The brightness of light
is what's important
it's not about the blue.
So if you want to wear them, wear them,
or just dim the lights
or turn the lights off.
So let's say you go to sleep at,
you get home after this
4:00 PM to 2:00 AM shift,
you maybe eat something, you go to sleep,
and you wake up and it's noon or 1:00 PM.
Should you get light in your eyes?
Well, your first assumption
based on what I've said
previously might be
that you're in the circadian dead zone
that you can't because it's noon 1:00 PM.
But you're not in the circadian dead zone
because you're somebody who goes to sleep
early in the morning at 2:00 AM.
So it's not like the circadian dead zone
is a strict time of day, it's
an internal biological clock.
So what do you need to know?
You guessed it, you need to
know your temperature minimum.
You need to know whether not
your temperature is
increasing or decreasing.
And now we can make this
whole thing even simpler
and just say,
if your temperature is
decreasing, avoid light.
If your temperature is
increasing, get light.
It's that simple, okay?
If your temperature is
decreasing, avoid light,
if your temperature is
increasing, get light.
The shift worker who works
from 4:00 PM until 2:00 AM
has a temperature rhythm
that's very different than mine
where I wake up around 6:00 AM, 5:00 AM,
and I go to sleep around 11:00 PM, okay?
We both have a 24
hour-ish circadian cycle,
except mine is more aligned to the rise
and setting of the sun
and there's is not, right?
So you have to know your
internal temperature rhythm.
And no you don't have to
walk around with a thermometer wherever,
taking your temperature.
Although it'd be great
if some of the devices that are out there,
you know, people are counting their steps,
I think it'd be great if people had
a circadian body temperature measurement.
I'm not involved in any
of this device development
but I think it's a real
call to arms, pun intended,
to have a wristband that
would measure temperature
and would tell you your
temperature minimum
when you travel or whatnot.
I don't know, maybe some of
these devices already do that.
But if they don't, they should.
It's absolutely absurd to me
why we wouldn't have
the simple measurement,
very easy to get that kind of information.
You don't even need the
exact temperature read
all you need to know is
the high and low point.
So let's say you're a shift worker
who really is nocturnal, you're flipped.
Well, you want to stay on
that nocturnal schedule.
Now that can be very hard on families
and social life of all kinds.
But the person who is working say from,
you know, 8:00 PM, like
sundown to sunrise,
this raises a question.
Should they be looking at the sunrise
and should they be watching the sunset?
Waking up with a sunset,
going asleep at the sunrise.
You think, well, is that
light going to throw them off?
Ah, probably not.
It's just actually going to invert
what sunrise and sunset are.
When they're waking up in the morning,
if they look at the, you know,
they get some sunlight in their
eyes, they look at the sun
and get some bright light from devices
or overhead lights in
their apartment or home,
well, that's going to tend to wake them up
if it's in the evening, right?
So it's, you know I don't
know if I stated that clearly,
but if in the evening the sun is setting
and they're looking at that setting sun,
that is the morning sun for that person
and it will wake them up
for their night shift.
So temperature rising.
Then toward morning, what's happening?
Okay, well, they're closing
out their work shift.
You're going home, the sun is rising.
Do you look at the rising sun?
Well, based on what you now know
your eyes are very sensitive
to resetting of circadian clocks.
What will it do at that time?
If this were a classroom,
I would either cold call on somebody
or I'd wait for the oh, oh, oh, oh person
in the audience that inevitably exists.
So temperature is for that person,
they've been up for a while,
temperature is falling, not rising.
For me it will be rising.
But 'cause I'm diurnal,
I'm awake during the day.
For that person the temperature's falling
and so they view light while
temperature is falling.
What's it going to do?
It's going to phase delay them.
It's going to make it harder
for them to get to sleep
the following night.
So you would say that person
should watch the setting sun
to help them wake up
'cause they're going to
work the night shift,
but should probably have sunglasses on
or avoid viewing bright light
before they go to sleep.
So it's the same thing.
They're just on an inverted
as a typical person
who's diurnal, but they're
on an inverted schedule.
And so I'm really trying hard here
to make this all really clear.
There are kind of two patterns
of requests in the world
I'm noticing as I've
kind of ventured into the
this landscape of social
media and podcasts.
There are people who
want to know every detail
and want to quantify everything
'cause they want to get exactly right.
These are like the graduate students
and students that don't
want to make a mistake.
And to quote my graduate advisor,
provided the mistakes are not dangerous,
certainly not lethal,
you kind of want to make
a few little mistakes
so that you can adjust, right?
You don't want to endanger yourself.
But it's actually, you're not
going to get things perfect,
that's called learning.
Learning is when you realize,
ah, I viewed the sun this time
and then I stayed up and
it really messed me up,
I'll never do that again.
The other category of people seem to want
the one size fits all kind of like
give me this pill or
give me this protocol.
And those things generally work
but they don't afford people flexibility.
And if there's anything like that,
it's this temperature minimum
thing that I've been just
hammering on again and
again and again today
because it's something that you own
and that you can really use
as a key landmark for shifting your clock.
I suppose there's a third category,
which is, people accept that
biological systems are
actually much more forgiving
than the way they're sometimes described.
And I'm going to use
this as an opportunity
to editorialize a little bit.
You know, there's so
much made of sleep debt.
Look there isn't an IRS
equivalent for sleep.
They're not going to come around
and try and collect all the
sleep that you didn't get.
No one really knows what the
consequences are going to be
for you and for me and for the next person
for the sleep you didn't get.
You can't really recover
the sleep you missed out on,
but you also don't want to get
neurotically attached to a schedule
because there's this
thing called sleep anxiety
and then people have trouble
falling asleep and staying asleep.
So I want to spend a moment on that
and go back to a theme that
I've said many times before,
because these tools work
what I called NSDR, non-sleep deep rest.
So this would be hypnosis,
I gave you the link,
but I'll say it again, reveriehealth.com
for clinically tested,
research tested free hypnosis
for anxiety but also for sleep.
Those are very beneficial people.
NSDR protocols, non-sleep
deep rest protocols
for things like yoga nidra, I
provided some links to those
in the caption for episode two.
These things really work.
Last night, I woke up, I
went to bed about 10:30,
I woke up at three in the morning,
I knew I wasn't feeling rested.
I did a NSDR protocol, I fell back asleep,
I woke up at 6:30, okay.
You need to teach your brain
and your nervous system
how to turn off your
thoughts and go to sleep.
And ideally you do that without medication
unless there's a real need,
you do that through these
behavioral protocols.
They work because they involve
using the body to shift the mind
not trying to just turn off your thoughts
in the middle of the night.
Now there are periods of life
where things are stressful
and people are concerned
and you will have some struggle
getting and staying asleep.
And there's, that really
has to do more with anxiety
which NSDR protocols also can help with.
As I always say, do them
in the middle of the night
if you wake up and you
want to go back to sleep
during the middle of the day,
to teach your nervous system to calm down
and do them first thing in the morning
if you didn't feel you got enough sleep.
In other words, do them whenever
you have an opportunity to do them
because they really can help
you learn how to turn on
the parasympathetic/calming arm
of your autonomic nervous system.
There's no other way that I'm aware of
to teach your system to slow down
and turn off your thoughts
and go back to sleep.
But these are powerful protocols,
and there's a lot of research now
to support the fact that
they can really help.
Meditation would be another example.
Certain kinds of meditation
involve focus and alertness.
Those are slightly different
than meditations that involve
lack of focus and attention
to say internal states.
I'm going to pause there,
and then I want to talk
about kids and the elderly.
In other words, how do we control
sleep and circadian
rhythms and wakefulness
in babies, adolescents,
teens, and aged folks.
All right, before we
talk about sleep in kids,
I want to tell a little story.
It's not a joke, many
of you will be relieved
that I'm not going to try and
tell another joke this episode.
Which is the relationship between light,
skin and pelage color,
dopamine and reproduction, mating.
So many seasonally breeding animals,
Siberian hamsters which
I mentioned earlier,
rabbits, fox, other animals,
change their color of their coat.
In the winter they tend
to be a lighter color,
sometimes pure white,
sometimes with flecks of black or brown.
And in the summer their
pelage changes to a color of
you know, brown or red, some
other vastly different color.
That shift is controlled
by light and by melatonin.
This has an interesting
correlate in humans.
So humans obviously have
different skin tones
just genetically because
of the amount of melanin
in one skin, depending
on genetic background.
But of course sunlight will
increase the amount of melanin
in the skin regardless, right?
This is suntan, sunburn,
etc, bronzing, whatever.
The whole system is wired
so that shifts in skin color
and shifts in these cells
within the eye and melatonin
are actually very closely linked.
So here's the story.
Many years ago, meaning about
10 years ago, 15 years ago,
let's see it was 20 years ago, forgive me.
A guy named Iggy Provencio
who was running his own lab
at uniformed armed services,
this is a standard biological laboratory,
discovered that there
was an opsin in the eye
in the cells of the eye
that connect to the rest of
the brain called melanopsin.
Melanopsin, as many of you now know
is the opsin, it's like a
pigment, it absorbs light.
It is the opsin that converts
light into electrical signals
to then set the circadian clock.
Iggy discovered melanopsin
because it was similar in form
to what was in frog melanophores.
It was actually in the skin of frogs
that allowed those frogs to go from
pale white, when it was dark,
for most of the 24 hour cycle,
to pigmented green or brown for a frog.
So there's this relationship
between the cells in our eye
and the pigment cells of our skin.
And we also know that in long
days, there's more breeding.
How does that work?
Well that's actually from dopamine
triggering increases in
testosterone, mainly in males,
and estrogen mainly in
females although of course,
there's testosterone
estrogen in both sexes.
So we have this kind of
pathway where it's light,
increases in the melanin,
dopamine and reproduction on the one hand
and lack of light, melatonin,
decreases in the darkness of skin,
less melanin in the skin,
or in the case of an animal with fur,
white fur and no reproduction
on the other hand.
And humans don't actually
shift their breeding patterns
tremendously from long
days and short days,
although there are some data
that there's some shifts.
We also don't radically
change our skin color
depending on how much
sunlight exposure we have.
But the simple way to put this is,
when days are long,
there's a lot more dopamine
and we feel really good
and there's a lot more breeding
and breeding-like behavior.
When days are short,
there's a lot less dopamine
and a lot less breeding behavior
because these pathways
are very highly conserved.
Now what's interesting is that,
as we've moved into a modern society
where much of our waking days
we are looking at screens, which is fine,
'cause we're getting a
lot of light that way
although not as much as sunlight.
But also at night,
we're getting a lot of light from screens.
What's happened is all these path ways,
melanin in the skin, turnover
of skin cells, dopamine,
all of this stuff has
become completely disrupted.
Now that's not to say
that we should go back
to a time in which we didn't
use artificial lights.
But I think the important thing to realize
is that feeling good with
getting a lot of light,
the relationship to dopamine
and melanin in the skin,
and the good feelings of
getting light also on our skin
provided you're not getting burned
or you're not getting
excessive UV exposure,
those are not just coincidences.
Those are hard-wired biological mechanisms
that exist in everybody
regardless of how light or dark
your skin is to begin with.
There's another point, which is important,
which is that the dopamine system
which is this feel-good molecule
is very closely related
to the testosterone and
estrogen in reproductive cycles.
Remember melatonin inhibits
gonadotropin-releasing hormone,
luteinizing hormone, and the
production of these hormones,
and melatonin is the effector.
It is the hormone of darkness.
So, I just threw a lot of biology at you.
And I'm not saying you're
like a Siberian hamster,
at least not in ways that I'm aware of.
I'm not saying that your pelage
color is going to change.
Actually the reason people go gray
is because when you're really
stressed, did you know this,
that when you're really stressed,
there's an increase in the nerve fibers
that release adrenaline
to the hair follicle
and that activates peroxide
groups in the hair follicle
that cause the hair to
actually go gray or white.
So actually stress does make
your hair gray or white.
Aging does it too.
That was a brief aside,
but for those of you
that are interested in
the relationship between
light and skin tone
and all that kind of stuff,
I thought you might find it
interesting that the cells in your eye
are a lot like these skin
cells in frogs or in animals
that shift their entire color
and sometimes metamorphosize.
You know, there are some
species that literally
change shape in their reproductive organs.
In fact, if that wasn't weird enough,
when I was in graduate school at Berkeley,
there was another graduate
student studying a species
of hermaphroditic mole, right,
those little things that dig,
hermaphrodite mole that would change
from having ovaries to
testes and back again
depending on day life.
Super cool, super different,
and wild biological mechanism.
If you're wondering how
those animals reproduce
they actually adjust the
numbers of males and females
depending on the density
of males and females.
So if there are too many males,
some of the males turn
their testes into ovaries.
And if there're too many females,
they turn their ovaries into testes.
They actually are true
hermaphroditic animals
as opposed to as pseudo
hermaphrodite animals.
Okay, let's get back on track.
Let's talk about the animal
that most of you care about
which is the human animal.
New parents and babies.
All right, as I mentioned earlier,
melatonin is not cyclic,
it's not cycling in babies,
it's more phasic.
It's being released at a
kind of a constant level.
And babies tend to be smaller
than adults, they are.
And so those concentrations
of melatonin are very high.
As the baby grows, those concentrations
per unit volume are going to go down.
Babies are not born with a
typical sleep wake cycle.
And now all the parents are saying,
tell me something I didn't know.
They also have, and I really
want to emphasize this,
they also have much more
sensitive optics of the eye.
So a number of people
have asked me, you know,
should I be exposing my baby to sunlight?
You don't want to avoid sunlight,
but their eyes are very sensitive,
the optics of their eyes
aren't quite developed
so much so that you know when
you look at a newborn baby
and they look a little glassy-eyed
and they're kind of looking through you
or even a young child.
A lot of people think
that they're seeing you
the way that you're seeing them.
Hate to break it to you, but
if you ever can just google
visual image of a like a one month old.
The optics of their eyes are so poor
that you're a cloudy image.
They're not seeing your fine detail.
As the optics get better,
then they will see you
with more and more clarity.
But a lot of that is clearing of the lens
and some of the other aqueous
features of the newborn eye,
they don't see very well.
But they also don't have such great ways
of adjusting to bright light.
And so babies have a natural
aversion to bright lights.
So you really want to avoid
trying to use sunlight
or really bright light
in the same way that
you would for an adult
on a young baby or child.
As children get older however,
melatonin does start to
become slightly more cyclic,
slightly more cycled,
and their body temperature
rhythms also start to
fall into a more regular,
not quite 24 hour rhythm,
they're more of these ultradian rhythms.
So in episode, I think it was
one or two of the podcast,
or maybe both, we talked
about these 90 minute
so-called ultradian rhythms,
where every 90 minutes
babies are going through a
cycle of body temperature
and some other hormonal features.
I mean, so much is
changing in their system.
So what to do if a child isn't sleeping?
You can use phases of
darkness and phases of light
but they're going to have to be shortened
in order to try and encourage sleep
when you want the child to sleep.
It's not that they're
just not going to fall
into an adult-like regime
of a temperature minimum
and a temperature maximum.
Their temperature minimums and maximums
are fluctuating much more quickly.
And it varies tremendously.
Actually there's an interesting literature
of whether or not they have siblings,
whether or not they're twins,
whether or not they're
in a nursery environment,
whether or not they're alone,
hopefully the baby's not alone,
but you know what I mean,
that they're sleeping alone in a room
while you're in the other room.
There are a couple of
things that seem to help
which is getting the overall environment
into a 24 hour schedule.
So having the room slightly colder,
obviously you want babies
to be nice and cozy,
slightly colder when you
would like them to be asleep,
slightly warmer for the times
you would like them to be awake.
Babies tend to run pretty hot anyway.
And obviously you want to be very careful
about avoiding all extremes
of temperature, cold or hot.
So if they're going through
these 90 minute cycles,
you're going to have to adjust
to those 90 minute cycles as well.
So then people say, well, that's
not going to help me at all
because how do I deal with the fact
that I need to be up
every 90 minutes at night?
There are a couple tools
that can be helpful.
The first one is going to
be to try and understand
the relationship between
calm and deep sleep.
So the autonomic nervous system
can put us into states of panic,
where that's kind of seesaw
of autonomic alertness,
goes all the way to panic.
Or it can be alertness, or it
can be alert and calm, right?
So there's a range
there, it's a continuum.
It can also be that you're in deep sleep,
so the other end of the seesaw is way up
or you're your in light sleep
or you're kind of sleepy,
or you're just feeling kind of relaxed.
Perhaps the most important thing
if you're having to map to a baby schedule
in order to make sure that they're getting
changings, and nursing, etc,
at the appropriate times,
is to try and maintain,
if you can't sleep or you
can't sleep continuously,
to try and maintain your
autonomic nervous system
in a place where you're not
going into heightened states of alertness
when you would ideally be sleeping.
Now, I realize that this
could be translated to
try and stay calm while
you're sleep deprived,
which is very hard for people to do.
But this is where
the non-sleep deep rest
protocols surface again
and can potentially be very beneficial
for people to be able to
recover, not necessarily sleep,
but for them to maintain
a certain amount of autonomic regulation.
So what would this look like?
This would look like, the baby goes down,
maybe it's only going to
go down for 45 minutes.
If you can capture sleep, capture sleep.
There are some data showing
what's called polyphasic sleep.
If you can sleep in 45
minute increments or batches,
even if it's spread throughout the day
with periods of wakefulness in between,
as miserable as that sound,
there are actually some adults that have
deliberately employed that,
who don't have children for
the sake of work productivity.
And it does tend to reduce
the total overall amount
of sleep that you need.
It is a very hard schedule
for most people to maintain
but if you have a baby, the
baby may be throwing you
into that kind of schedule anyway.
So if you can get 45 minutes
sleep while they sleep, great.
If you can get another
45 minutes after waking
and then they go back
down to sleep, great.
So as many phases of sleep as you can get.
But if you can't sleep
the data on non-sleep
deep rest type protocols
does show that at least
from a neurochemical level,
I want to be clear what that means,
reset of things like dopamine
levels in the basal ganglia
measured by things like positron
emission tomography, etc.
Those things tend to reset
themselves pretty well
if you can access these deep rest state.
So that means not being alert
throughout the entire time
that the baby is sleeping.
Trying to sort of mirror
the baby's sleep cycle
which can be brutal for certain people,
and especially if you're
trying to prepare meals
and do all these things.
So I do recognize
that there are a lot of
constraints on parenting
not just mapping on your
baby's sleep schedule.
As children approach ages
one, two, three, four,
that's when certainly the
optics of the eyes have improved
but you don't want to
damage the eyes of course,
with very bright light.
They are much more sensitive even until
they're kind of 10, 11 years old.
And we'll talk about vision
in children in a moment.
But trying to get longer
and longer batches of sleep
through, hopefully not through the use
of administering melatonin to the kids
'cause that's what I talked about before
why that could potentially be detrimental
talk about that with your doctor.
But more so trying to get
longer blocks of sleep
that map onto these ultradian cycles.
So it would be better
off to get a three hour,
like two-90 minute cycles,
than a four hour batch of sleep
because waking up in the middle
of those ultradian cycles
can just be brutal for parent and kid.
So if one can't get a full six or 10,
or some kids should even
be sleeping 12 hours
when they're growing quickly,
trying to get batches of sleep
even if they're fractured
throughout the 24 hour cycle
that are matched more to
these 90 minute cycles,
meaning maybe one ultradian
cycle of 90 minutes,
or two back to back, or
three back to back to back.
That's going to be better than waking up
in the middle of an ultradian cycle.
It's just going to set
any number of other things
in a better direction than
were you to try to say,
just enforce or force a full
eight or 10 hours of sleep.
That's at least what the literature shows.
Some kids sleep great through the night,
starting at a very
young age, others don't.
I typically hear from people
who are struggling tremendously,
they're losing their mind understandably,
because they're not sleeping,
their kid's not sleeping and,
or their kid is sleeping
for such brief periods.
So in other words, try
and access deep calm
if you can't sleep, try and
access sleep, if you can sleep
even if it's fractured.
And then you say, well, what
about all the sunlight viewing
and the exercise stuff?
When sleep is really, really dismantled,
meaning it's happening in
various times of day or night,
that's especially, at those times
it's going to be especially
important for the parent
to get morning and evening sunlight
because your circadian clock
is going into a tailspin
and it basically wants
to anchor to something.
So you want to give it two
anchors, morning and evening light.
Okay, so this is rather different
than what I described for shift work,
this is when things are really chaotic
and you're just not able to sleep.
Similar circumstances can arise
if you're taking care of
a very sick loved one,
you're up all night.
Try and stay calm using NSDR protocols,
I know it's harder to do than to say,
but those protocols are
there, they're free,
there's research to support them.
Try and get sleep whenever you can
but also try to get morning sunlight
and evening sunlight
in your eyes if you can
and if you can't get that,
use artificial light, okay?
What about later life?
So kids now, adolescents, teens,
it is true that teens have
a tendency to wake up later
and go to sleep later.
In part, just because
they're sleeping a lot more.
They're churning out
gonadotropin-releasing hormone
and luteinizing hormone.
Their whole bodies are changing.
I don't know whether or
not people realize this,
but the fastest rate of aging
that any of us will
ever undergo is puberty.
That is the fastest rate of aging.
And so there's a huge number
of biological processes
that are happening during puberty,
probably devote a whole episode
to puberty as a fascinating
aspect to the life course
but it is accelerated period of aging.
And the circadian clock mechanisms
sometimes are very intact,
and sometimes they're a little dismantled
and going through some change,
but prioritize the duration of sleep
for adolescents and teens.
Now, if that means they're
sleeping until 2:00 PM,
and then waking up and
then they're up all night,
the up all night part can become a problem
especially with all the devices,
texting in their rooms
or playing video games.
Morning and evening
sunlight would be ideal
but some kids are just going to sleep
through the morning sunlight.
However, if you were to
measure their temperature,
what you would find is that
their temperature minimum
would come later in the morning.
It's not going to be 8:00 AM.
It's going to be maybe even 10:00 AM,
if they're sleeping until 11 or 12.
Or it might be 8:00 AM if
they're sleeping until 10.
Remember temperature minimum is two hours
before your average
waking time, typically.
So in teens, it maximizes
the total amount of sleep.
Try and get regular sunlight
either in the morning
or in the evening or both.
But if they're sleeping
through the morning sunrise,
that's probably not as much of an issue,
waking them up and depriving them of sleep
is probably worse because their T-min,
their temperature minimum,
is actually falling later.
So their circadian dead
zone is later, etc.
So I think with adolescents and teens
it makes sense to kind of give
them a little bit more rope
in terms of allowing them some leeway
to adjust their own schedule.
Some schools are even
starting classes later
on the basis of some very good biology
to support this late shifted rhythm
and this extended sleep phase.
There are data from Dr. Jamie Zeitzer,
Department of Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences,
and others at Stanford, showing
that turning on the lights
in the room of a teen before they wake up
helps them get more sleep
the subsequent night,
it also tricks them
into going to sleep a little bit earlier.
But it gives them about 45
minutes more of deep sleep.
And that's been shown statistically,
total sleep time increases as well.
If they're hiding under the
covers, that's not going to work,
but their eyes don't have to be open.
I know a few parents now
that are coming in with a flashlight
and flashing their kids over their eyelids
before they wake up in hopes
of getting this to work,
some have told me this is working.
That's not part of a standard study.
But it does seem to work
because, now you should know why,
because if light's getting
through the eyelids,
and it's say 8:00 AM and
the kid is still asleep
and they're going to wake up at 10,
you're giving them light
just after or around
their temperature minimum,
which is going to make them
want to go to sleep earlier.
And in the case of teens,
for some reason we don't quite understand,
sleep longer, about 45 minutes longer,
spend more time in deep sleep.
Adults can do this too, if
you can persuade someone
or put your lights on timer
for lights to go on before you wake up,
that's really going to help
you wake up earlier, okay.
So if you're starting to hear
some themes are really
resounding over and over again,
that should be reassuring to you, right.
That these are core mechanisms.
Fortunately, there aren't
1,000 different mechanisms.
Now in the elderly,
there's a real tendency to
want to go to sleep very early
and wake up very early.
And people should talk to their physician.
There is some evidence
that melatonin levels
and patterns of melatonin secretion
can become a little
chaotic in elderly folks.
What do I mean by elderly?
Well, it's going to differ.
Rates of aging differ, right?
You see some 65 year olds
that are struggling to move
and seem much older than
some 65 year olds that are,
you know, still hustling
around and have tons of energy.
There's a lot of variation,
some of it's genetic, some
of it's lifestyle factors,
you know, it really varies.
Certainly lifestyle factors
can play an important role
in rates of aging.
I think that the most prominent results
from sleep and circadian
rhythms in the elderly are
they need to get as much natural light,
even if it's through windows.
I realize that some elderly folks
can't get outside as easily.
It's not safe for them to do it,
they can't move around as easily.
Exercise can come in various forms
for people that can't get outside
and get a ton of sunlight
by jogging or cycling.
If they're not able to do that,
light through window in that
case, open window ideally,
but for temperature reasons, etc,
sometimes the window has to be closed.
Getting people near that window
and away from artificial
light early in the day,
lights during the night phase
can have a tremendous effect.
And in the elderly that's when melatonin
might be a viable option.
And this should be discussed
with a physician, of course,
but you know, you're way
past the puberty time point.
In most cases, people who
are in their 70s, and 80s,
and 90s, are not churning out
a lot of GnRH and luteinizing
hormone to begin with.
And that's where struggles
with falling asleep and staying asleep,
all the same parameters
and things we've described
before still apply,
light, exercise, temperature, etc,
but that's where melatonin
might be of greatest benefit.
And again, I'm not pushing melatonin here
but I think for elderly folks
who are having trouble
falling and staying asleep,
that might be worthwhile.
There are, and I should
just also mention that
regular schedule for
folks that are elderly
and as much natural
light as safely possible,
those are going to be the key levers
for adjusting sleep in
circadian schedules.
I've mentioned before
in previous podcasts,
other supplements besides melatonin.
And some of those supplements
are quite good for sleep.
You know, I'm not a supplement pusher,
I am somebody who takes
supplements, I believe in them,
some have worked for me some
have not worked as well,
but I certainly believe in
getting the behaviors right.
Whether or not it's NSDR
protocols, viewing natural light,
exercise, hot baths, or cold
showers, or what have you,
behavioral protocols first.
There are some supplements that
I've mentioned in previous podcasts
but I've seemed to get a
lot of questions about.
So I just want to take a couple
minutes and just talk about
some of the supplements
that can be beneficial
for helping turning off
thinking, accessing deeper sleep,
and even being able to
compact your sleep schedule
into a shorter period of hours,
meaning getting by well with less sleep.
People take a lot of sleeping pills.
I'm not going to tell people
not to take sleeping pills.
They can be very
problematic, habit-forming,
high side-effect incidents in many cases,
some people can handle them just fine.
Again, I'm no physician,
I'm not prescribing anything.
I'm a professor, so I
profess a lot of things
some of which are my opinion.
Although, if you look at
the scientific literature,
there are some impressive data around some
non-prescription drug type supplements
that have fairly high safety margins
that you might consider
but you should talk to your doctor always
before adding or taking anything
out of your health regimes, right?
Your health is not my responsibility,
it's your responsibility,
so be a stringent filter.
Along those lines, one of the
most powerful and useful tools
that I've mentioned here on many times
and I plan to mention
many many more times,
is the website examine.com
which I have no affiliation with
but is a wonderful site that links you to
quality peer reviewed studies
relating to just about any supplement
including some safety warnings.
Will also tell you what subjects,
whether or not it was rats,
cats, elderly folks or kids,
that a given study was done on,
which is important, can be
kind of hard to pull from
sites where people are just
advertising supplements, right?
They usually don't tell
you what the study was
and who were these rats,
who were these kids, etc.
There are three supplements
that at least for me
have had a tremendously
positive effect on my sleep
that some of you might consider.
I would say,
if you're doing everything
properly behaviorally
and you're still having issues,
then supplements might
be a good thing for you.
Or if you are traveling
and you want a little bit of extra help
in buffering your sleep
wakefulness protocols.
Some people like to go
just to the supplements.
They're like, what should I take?
I have people in my life that are like,
just tell me what to take, you know.
I'm more of, here's what you
might want to do or not do
and then think about what you
might want to take or not take.
But personal preference
and it's a free country,
so you can do what you like.
Magnesium.
So magnesium has been shown
to increase the depth of sleep
and has been shown to
decrease the amount of time
that it takes to access
sleep, to fall asleep.
It comes in various forms.
I've talked a bunch of times
about magnesium threonate,
T-H-R-E-O-N-A-T-E, threonate.
which seems to be the more
bioavailable form of magnesium.
And magnesium threonate it seems
is shadowed preferentially to the brain
which is where you want it.
And there's certain transporters,
it actually engages the GABA pathway
which tends to turn off
certain areas of the forebrain
and allows you to kind of fall asleep.
There is a study, if
you'd like to explore it
since people serious about supplementation
might want to explore the study,
which is Ates et al, A-T-E-S
Dose-Dependent Absorption Profile
of Different Magnesium Compounds.
Looks to me like a quality
peer reviewed paper.
I can put the link in the caption,
and it explores all the
different forms of magnesium.
It does seem like magnesium glycinate
can be similar to magnesium threonate
in terms of which tissues it is shadow to.
Magnesium malate, M-A-L-A-T-E,
is preferentially shadow
to the muscle, it appears,
as opposed to the brain.
So it's going to be more of
a muscle repair type thing
or restoring magnesium
stores in the periphery
as opposed to the brain.
Magnesium citrate has another
name that I won't mention
ingest, because magnesium
citrate's main effect,
at least on me and the people I know,
seems to be a laxative effect
as opposed to a cognitive effect.
There's also some evidence
that magnesium threonate
can be neuroprotective.
Those data come from quality labs,
mostly rodent studies, not human studies,
but it's kind of interesting.
And again, the safety
margins for these things
tend to be pretty high,
but anytime you're going
to take something new
you should approach it with caution,
especially since magnesium
could be involved
in heart rhythm and things of that sort.
The other supplement that
has been very beneficial
for me is theanine.
So this is T-H-E-A-N-I-N-E, theanine,
T-H-E-A-N-I-N-E.
Theanine activates certain GABA pathways
which are involved in turning off
top-down processing and thinking,
making it easier to fall asleep.
And theanine, 100
milligrams to 300 milligrams
has a calming effect.
Theanine is now showing up
in a number of different
energy drinks and even some coffees
as a way to try and get
people to ingest more
of a given type of coffee 'cause
the idea is it will take away
the jitters and the anxiety,
allowing people to drink more coffee.
I'm talking about taking
magnesium and theanine
30 to 60 minutes before bedtime
not during the day to quell anxiety,
but rather 30 to 60 minutes before bedtime
with or without food, for
me hasn't made a difference.
And the combination of those
two things has really helped.
Theanine for sleepwalkers
can be a problem.
It does increase the
intensity of your dreams,
it gives you very vivid dreams.
So for sleep walkers or
people that get night terrors
stay away from theanine is my advice.
Magnesium theanine might
be something to explore
for those of you that
don't have those issues.
With the emphasis on might.
And then I've talked about a compound,
and last time I talked about
the mechanisms of apigenin
which is a derivative of
chamomile, A-P-I-G-E-N,
which acts as a little bit of a hypnotic
by activating chloride channels,
hyperpolarized neurons,
increases GABA in the brain,
basically makes you feel a little sleepy.
And chamomile, for those
of you that read your
what was it that Peter Rabbits
snuck into Mr. McGregor's garden,
ate the chamomile, fell
asleep, Mr. Gregory came back.
Okay, anyone flashing
back to elementary school?
Okay.
There's a story about chamomile
having these kind of
sedative-like effects,
apigenin is highly concentrated chamomile
also has intra-estrogenic effects.
So if you want to keep your estrogen up
you might want to be
cautious about apigenin.
That's where things like
examine.com become really useful
because you can go to
examine you put in apigenin,
and it'll tell you all
the things that it does
and all the things that it
does can sometimes include
things that you had no idea,
like reducing conversion of
certain androgens to estrogens
which you might like or
you might want to avoid.
That's up to you and where
you want your estrogen levels
depending on who you
are and what your life
circumstances and goals are.
A few other things that can
help the transition to sleep,
are things like 5-HTP L-tryptophan.
I've talked about why I'm
not a fan of those for me,
they tend to throw me into deep sleep
and then I wake up and I
can't fall back asleep.
So I don't like to tinker
with my serotonin system,
I don't like to tinker
with my dopamine system,
for entirely other reasons but
none of which are particularly concerning
it's just that I find that
if I increase my dopamine
by taking L-Tyrosine in pill form,
then I crash really hard the next day.
Or if I take 5-HTP L-tryptophan
I fall deeply asleep and then I wake up.
But I didn't mention
that there might be ways
to make sleep more compact.
And so this is actually a request to you.
I had a really interesting
experience when I was a postdoc.
I went for the first
time to an acupuncturist.
I know there're varying
thoughts and opinions out
there about acupuncture.
I can't say that I've benefit
so much from the acupuncture.
There are now quality peer
reviewed studies showing
publishing neuron, Cell Press
journal, excellent journal,
showing that acupuncture can stimulate
some anti-inflammatory compounds
depending on where the
acupuncture is done.
These are really good
studies, came out last year.
I talked about this on Instagram,
I may talk about it again.
As well as certain acupuncture sites
that increase inflammation.
So, you know, you can get
different types of effects,
you can't just say acupuncture
is great across the board.
And I'm assuming that
the acupuncturist know
which sites are good for
increasing inflammation,
which ones are good for
decreasing inflammation.
However, this acupuncturist that I went to
gave me these red pills.
He said, these are minerals for sleep,
and it was remarkable.
I took the red pills.
Isn't that a thing now?
Take the red pill.
I don't know what that means, right,
'cause I'm not tuned in.
But these red pills
looked like little M&Ms,
I took a couple of them on his suggestion
and I fell deeply asleep
and four hours later woke up
feeling incredibly rested,
more rested than I had
ever felt in my entire life
and I never required more
than four hours sleep.
Unfortunately, acupuncturist moved away,
I never figured out what
was in those red pills.
I didn't get a chance to
do the mass spectroscopy,
and I still wonder, he
said they were minerals.
So somebody out there knows
what these red pills are
and what this compound is.
And it was incredible,
and I would love to know what those are.
So if you know,
please don't go taking red pills at random
to try and recreate this
non-experiment experience of mine.
But please do contact me if you find out
or if you're an acupuncturist
and you know what these
mysterious red pills were,
because they were pretty awesome.
Once again, I've thrown
a tremendous amount of information at you.
I hope you will figure out
your temperature minimum
and start working with that
to access the sleep and wakeful cycles
that you want to access.
I hope that you will explore NSDR.
You might want to explore supplementation
if that's your thing.
You have now access to a lot of mechanism
about sleep and wakefulness.
But in keeping with the
theme of this podcast,
where we stay on topic
for an entire month or even slightly more,
we are not done with
sleep and wakefulness.
I know this is very different
than the typical podcast format,
where one week it's how
to become superhuman
and the next week it's how to, you know,
develop growth mindset and
it's kind of all over the place
with episode to episode.
We are staying on track
because I really believe
that as we drill deeper and
deeper into these mechanisms,
and you start hearing
some of the same themes
again and again,
you're going to start
to develop an intuition
and an understanding of how
these systems work in you
and your particular life circumstances.
And my goal is really to
eventually become obsolete.
It's what my graduate advisor used to call
the hit by a bus principle.
She had a somewhat morbid
sense of humor and used to be,
well, if I get hit by a bus tomorrow,
what are you going to do
without me blabbing at you here?
So I don't want to get hit by a bus,
I plan on living a very long time,
if I have anything to say about it.
But were I to get hit by a bus tomorrow,
what would you do for your
sleep and wakefulness, right?
You could put a comment on YouTube,
which I hope you will do.
But if I were hit by a bus and killed
then I wouldn't be able
to answer your question.
So know your temperature minimum,
understand light in the early
part of the day is valuable.
Light when you want to be awake,
provided it's not so bright it's damaging.
It's great for you whether
or not it comes from screens
or sunlight but sunlight's better.
Avoid light in the four to six hours
before your temperature minimum
or else you're going to delay your clock
unless you're traveling and
that's what you want to do.
Okay?
Use temperature, increase
temperature to shift your clock,
decrease temperature to
delay your clock, okay?
Map out your temperature
and understand it.
You don't have to know degree
by degree across the day,
know your minimum, know
your maximum temperature
in your 24 hour cycle
and you'll feel great power through that
because then you'll know also
about these ultradian cycles,
these 90 minute cycles within
which you can do focused work.
Don't expect the focus to come early,
expect focus to come in the middle
and then kind of taper off.
I talked a little bit about kids,
a little bit about
elderly, about parenting,
we are going to continue,
there's going to be more.
But now shift workers, travelers,
people that are jet
lagging themselves at home,
you now have levers in place.
Information can be powerful
but you have to implement it
in ways, obviously safe
ways and reasonable ways.
But implementing this knowledge
in the ways that you trust are
safe and reasonable for you
is going to be the way that you can
develop a bit of a
laboratory about yourself.
I loath the term biohacking,
sorry, biohackers.
I don't believe in hacking anything.
I believe in understanding mechanism
and applying the principles of mechanism
for which there are large bodies
of quality peer reviewed data,
and even a whole center of mass around
certain biological principles,
like the effects of light and temperature,
temperature minimums, that will allow you
to shift your biology in the
ways that you want it to go.
That will allow you to
shift your psychology
in the ways you want to go.
Next podcast episode,
we are going to talk
more about a few things.
First of all, we're going to
answer more of your questions
'cause during office hours,
I didn't get to all your questions from
the previous episode.
So I do read the comments
and we're paying attention
and figuring out the
most common questions.
We are going to get to
some of the harder topics.
Someone came at me,
it's always fun when somebody
does this, they said, well,
these are just the kind of
basal low-level questions.
What about the big stuff?
What about dreaming and lucid
dreaming and consciousness?
Look, I'll talk about that stuff.
And I'm planning to do that,
some of which in the next episode
and the following episode maybe even.
But I want to give you data.
I want to give you things
that are supported by data.
So I will try to speculate
as little as possible
because this is a podcast about science
and science-based tools for everyday life.
This is not about me speculating.
Many people have speculated
about the role of sleep,
dreaming and consciousness.
Fascinating topics, and a rather
circular argument frankly,
it's been going on for centuries.
Someday we'll get there,
right now we're concentrating
on these deep biological mechanisms
that make you who you are
and allow you to feel
certain ways, good or bad,
allow you to function
physically in certain ways,
good or bad, and give you
more of a sense of control.
That's my goal here.
Many people have quite graciously asked
how they can help support the podcast.
First of all, thank you,
we appreciate the question.
You can support the podcast
by subscribing to the podcast on YouTube,
as well as subscribing
on Apple or Spotify.
And you can also leave us comments
and feedback on YouTube and
at Apple that really helps.
We would hope the feedback
would be positive,
but nonetheless, leave us
feedback, ask questions,
we will use those questions
to create future content for the podcast.
As well, if you can recommend the podcast
to friends and family and
other people that you think
might find the information
of use, that's terrific.
And check out our sponsors
that we mentioned at the beginning.
That's a really great
way to help support us
and our ability to bring
you this information.
Along those lines, a lot
of people have asked me
about supplements and
supplement companies.
So up until now I've been reluctant
to recommend specific supplement brands.
The supplement industry
is kind of a wild west
of different brands,
different levels of
quality and stringency.
It can be very complicated
and what's on the bottle is
not always what you're getting.
The quality of what you're getting
varies from company to company,
and even from substance to
substance, batch to batch.
So I'm pleased to say that
I'm partnering with Thorne,
Thorne, spelled T-H-O-R-N-E,
is a supplement company that
works with the Mayo Clinic,
and with pretty much all the
major sports team organizations
and that I know to have the
highest levels of stringency
in terms of what's in the bottle
matches what's listed on the bottle,
and in terms of the quality
of what they put in those supplements.
So, while I mentioned earlier,
that supplements aren't for everybody.
If you're interested in trying
some of these supplements
you might want to check out Thorne.
If you want to do that you can go to
thorne.com/u/huberman.
So it's t-h-o-r-n-e.com,
c-o-m slash the letter u slash huberman,
and if you do that,
they'll give you 20% off
any of the supplements
that you happen to purchase from Thorne.
Thanks so much for your
time and attention.
I really appreciate it.
See you next time on the
Huberman Lab Podcast.
And as always, thanks for
your interest in science.
[bright music]